Yes.
Fantastic.
Okay.
Hi.
I'm Filippo.
I do a few things.
In my day job, I'm an open source maintainer.
I'm one of the maintainers of the Go Cryptography
Standard Library, and I used to be the lead of the Go
security team at Google.
And then in 2022, I quit because I had opinions on how
you could fund open source maintenance, and people said it was never
going to work, and I'm that kind of person.
Anyway, that's a completely different story, and that's what J
omis is about now.
It's a small organization of open source maintainers, but it
's not what we're here talking about.
You might have also heard that I am on the board of
the PLC organization that was just formed.
Woo!
Exactly.
Yes.
And that is closer to what I'm going to talk to
you about, because I'm going to tell you about transparency logs.
Transparency logs are something I am really, really into
because they meet the moment for providing accountability for the systems that
we have and that we can make for users.
But a step back.
What is a transparency log?
A transparency log is a Merkle tree.
Stop me if you've heard this one.
It's a pen-only Merkle tree, too.
It's not a Merkle search tree.
It's just a Merkle tree that keeps growing of entries.
And the entries are things that you want to have a list
of visible to everybody and where everybody has the same list of
things.
That is a very useful primitive because, for example, think about package
management.
I'm involved in Go and usually how package management works is
that you have a registry and you make an account, you upload
a thing, but that's very centralized.
Go has a completely different thing.
It has a decentralized system where the name of the module is
where you fetch it and there's a mechanism for fetching
that data.
Stop me if you've heard this one.
But the problem with that is that then you have problems like
left pad, you have the problem that if you connect to that
website, it knows that you connected to it and that you're
using it, which is not great.
You can fix those things with a centralized system because you can
put something that saves those modules and keeps them available.
So sometimes having a centralized relay, stop me if you've heard
this one, is useful.
However, the problem is that now you need to trust that centralized
party, just like you needed to trust PyPI and NPM.
Well, that's what we use transparency logs for.
There's a transparency log called the Go Jackson database, which is
just a long list of every Go module version and its hash.
It's append only, everybody sees the same list, and a client
will only install a Go module if it has a cryptographic
proof of inclusion in that list.
This already works.
You are using this if you're developing in Go.
And a lot of people don't know because that's the
beauty of tlogs, that you can build them on top
of a centralized experience, and they just work.
Python has tried so many times to get package outers to
sign their thing, and it never works because either people don't
check the signature, or if people check the signature, now you're
terrified of losing your key, so nobody signs, and you don't
go anywhere.
In tlogs one day we turn them on.
And that works, and that's what the system database is.
This is derived from certificate transparency, which is what Sunlight was
about, and there's links later.
The point of this is that you can use transparency logs to
provide accountability where it's hard to provide decentralized trust.
Instead of saying we're going to make a decentralized system where
you have to connect to different package outers and there's
all this problem, we said Google runs a proxy mirror.
But then we also said that proxy mirror is held honest by
the checksum database so that if they ever put a fake
module in there, the outer of that module can notice.
Because the same list that every client checks inclusion in is the
same list that you can just sign up, download the whole thing,
go like, yeah, that's my module.
Wait, that's not the module version I developed.
Google, what are you doing?
And Google is staking its reputation on the system.
To a cryptocurrency crowd, sometimes I describe it as there's proof
of work, proof of stake, and proof of reputation.
Tlogs remove all of the crypto economics, remove all of
the extra work, and instead say, look, are you willing to be
accountable for the content of this data, for all this data set?
If yes, great.
We will make a system such that if a client trusts something,
it means it's forever in a public list where it can
be audited.
And if you put something wrong in there, you will be held
accountable for that.
Which in practice would probably mean somebody forks go to change
what the checksum database operator is, because they're cryptographic
proof that its steward abused that power.
Cool.
So that's why I like transparency logs.
I also like ATProto.
So can we build transparency logs for ATProto collections?
What is an example use case?
For example, if you're making a package manager on top of
ATProto.
But also if you have any other situation where you would like
all of your collections to be append only, never change, and be
auditable forever.
That is not the case for likes and posts.
That's fine.
Like sometimes you want to delete the cringe post from yesterday, or
undo the like that you did while scrolling somebody's profile without
realizing it was not your following feed.
So those are deletable.
Fantastic.
But instead there are other applications where it makes sense to not
want deletions, not want things to change.
So let's say that you made some full collection and ABC
collection that you would like as a client to use, knowing that
those records can't go away.
Here's a sketch of how that could work in protocol.
Alice is developing a client that wants to consume Foo and
ABC records, and she requests for a T log to be operated.
So she makes a record called a T log config and says, "
Hey, here are some collections, some NSIDs, some DIDs,
can somebody please run a T log out of these?" And a
T log operator, which can be multiple ones because permissionlessly allows
picking different operators, like Geomys could say, "Sure, we'll
run T logs for free up to a million entries in the
T log." It's going to be what?
How much can a banana cost?
200 megabytes?
And it will create a T log, so it will take all
of these records using tap, put them into that append-only Mir
acle tree, publish that Miracle tree using the C2SP
T log specifications, which are already an ecosystem that the GoCheck
XM database uses, that StaticCT uses and so on.
And after publishing that, it makes a record saying, "Yeah, all right,
I'm operating an instance for that T log config." It's
the T log instance record, it has a strong ref to the
config, and the URL where you can find that T log.
Alice goes like, "Great, okay, I'm going to configure my clients
to require an inclusion proof, cryptographic inclusion proof in this T
log before they trust a record." And this is nice, because even
if our tap instance messes something up and we lose this
record over here, it doesn't end up in the T log,
so it's as good as if it didn't exist.
Because the client will not accept that record, will not process it,
will not trust it, will not install it if it's a
package, will not show it if it's an attestation
or a blue note or something like that, because it doesn't
have an inclusion proof.
So all of the things that get actually consumed by the client,
you can be sure that they're in that list.
And then someone else can go and monitor that list.
And if they're the package outer, they can be like, "Hey,
no, wait, wait, wait.
My PDFs published something I didn't want to publish," or
anything of the sort.
The leaves of this T log, so the actual things in the
Merkle tree, would be the hash of the did, the hash
of the NSID.
Why hashes?
Because you can never change the stuff in here.
And it's really nice not to get user controlled data in
places where you can't delete it.
Enough said.
And then the R key, which probably would have to be a
times of ID for the same reason, and the SID.
The records are not actually in there, but you have all of
the cryptographic pointers to the records.
And if a record ever gets deleted, sure, this collection becomes una
uditable, but the other ones are still standing, because you can
still check what the full set of those were by monitoring the
T log.
And then I guess we can also put the checkpoint back into
the protocol, because why not?
I mean.
So, yes.
This is a thing that we can build very easily, because T
log tooling, we've been developing it now for years to make
it easy and cheap to run, and there are a bunch of
libraries now.
There is deployed software that already uses this, GoCheck some database,
SigSum, SigStore, soon probably Merkle 3 certificates,
which will probably replace the web PKI because quantum computers are
coming.
Hmm.
Different story.
Different talk.
So, bunch of links.
It's just a loose leaf from leaflet, because this stuff
works.
Right?
I love it.
And yeah, you can find a bunch of links, and reach out
if you...
What I'm looking for next is somebody that has a AT
Proto use case for this, somebody that has a ATPr
oto collection that they would like to be able to say the
list is universally known, and anybody can audit all of the things
that a client could ever have trusted.
Thank you.